das"Surely computers cannot be intelligent-they can only do what their programmers tell them." 
"Surely animals cannot be intelligent-they can only do what their genes tell them." 

I believe the first statement is true, and the second statement is false. In other words, computers can't be intelligent, but animals can. The two questions could basically be combined into one: What is intelligence? I think intelligence is the ability to retain knowledge, and also to reason about their environment. It also involves learning from past experiences. A computer performs a set of instructions given by a programmer. It has no ability to reason about the world around them as animals do. Based on past experiences, animals can infer what might happen as a result of an event occurring. Many higher order animals have the capability of out-smarting their predators. They do this through reasoning about the situation and relying on their general background knowledge they have acquired throughout their life. The animal remembers some experience in the past, and uses this to help them make a decision when the situation arises again in the future. A computer doesn't have the ability to "remember" a past experience, so it can't use this previous knowledge to make a decision, it has to start all over again from scratch. 

Another problem is that so many things in the real world are subjective. Animals each have a different way of perceiving things and they each have their own personal feelings about something which could cause them to act in a certain way. Everything has a degree of importance and animals are able to distinguish between major and minor things. In a computer, information is represented as bits, which are either on or off, there is no in-between, so the computer cannot use subjective "thought." 

This leads to another issue, which is that of ambiguous grammars. A certain grammar might be ambiguous, that is, it might be able to be interpreted two different ways. A computer would have no way to distinguish between the two, since both interpretations are valid. It wouldn't have any way of knowing which interpretation was intended. However, a human (if I can also include humans among animals) would be able to figure out which meaning was intended, based on context. A computer can't really put things into context, because that would need to incorporate background knowledge, which a computer doesn't have. It doesn't have the common sense to figure these things out. 

Since intelligence includes aspects besides knowledge, such as general background knowledge, common sense, subjective thought, and using past experiences, animals have intelligence, whereas computers do not. Computers can only do what instructions are programmed to them, and things such as common sense and subjectivity cannot be programmed into them. Yes, animals gain some aspects of intelligence from their genes, but the whole array of intelligence is a combination of other things, which can't really be specifically programmed into genes. The intelligence of animals is influenced by their genes and by the environment in which they live. 

A very deep question indeed... It's the subject of a lot of philosophy and controversy. Now humans of course can be intelligent, what else could be intelligent if not humans. Otherwise why would the word intelligence exist. Animals? Not sure. They lack language understanding, rational reasoning skills, and probably they aren't aware of their existence. However, animals (even insects) can display amazingly intelligent behaviour.
What about computers. I'll concentrate on this. I think that computers if not yet intelligent, can BE MADE intelligent in the near future. The controversy is what intelligence is. Well, intelligence is mainly reasoning and learning new knowledge. What about being conscious of one's own existence, feeling emotions, understanding and so on. Can a computer ever do all these things? I think that these behaviours don't matter, because they are internal states. We just need to view the system externally. Emotions, consciousness, understanding, happiness, grief, etc. correspond to internal states or responses to the environment, and computers can be programmed to display those behaviours. They can also be provided with sensory input, with movement, can be made to appear like humans. The possibilities are countless. 
But how can a bit-grinding machine that just manipulates meaningless symbols understand what it is doing? How could it be aware of its existence or feel happiness or sorrow, while it is processing bits at a high speed. I think that the same is the case with humans. The root of intelligence is billions upon billions of nerve impulses and synapses, which in themselves don't have any meaning, but seen together in a higher level of abstraction, result in an intelligent behaviour. Maybe I'm taking the strong view and that of Allan Turing, but anyone who doesn't agree can reply.


